

===== PAGE 1 =====

RESEA RCH ARTICL E
Systematic discovery of the functional impact
of somatic genome alterations in individual
tumors through tumor-specific causal
inference
Chunhui Cai
ID
1,2
, Gregory F. Cooper
1,2
, Kevin N. Lu
1,2
, Xiaojun Ma
1
, Shuping Xu
3
,
Zhenlong Zhao
3
, Xueer Chen
1,2
, Yifan Xue
ID
1,2
, Adrian V. Lee
ID
2,3,4,5
, Nathan Clark
2,6
,
Vicky Chen
1,2
, Songjian Lu
1,2
, Lujia Chen
ID
1,2
, Liyue Yu
ID
1,2
, Harry S. Hochheiser
1,2
,
Xia Jiang
1,2
, Q. Jane Wang
3
*, Xinghua Lu
ID
1,2,5
*
1 Department of Biomedic al Informatic s, School of Medicine, University of Pittsbur gh, Pittsburgh, PA, United
States of America, 2 Center for Causal Discover y, Pittsbur gh, PA, United States of America, 3 Department of
Pharma cology and Chem ical Biology, Universit y of Pittsburgh , Pittsburgh, PA, United States of America,
4 Magee Women’s Cancer Research Center, Pittsburg h, PA, United States of America, 5 UPMC Hillman
Cancer Center, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA, United States of America,
6 Department of Computationa l Biology and Systems Biology , School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsbur gh, PA, United States of America
* qjw1@ pitt.edu (QJW); xinghua @pitt.edu (XL)
Abstract
Cancer is mainly caused by somatic genome alterations (SGAs). Precision oncology involves
identifying and targeting tumor-speci fic aberrations resulting from causative SGAs. We devel-
oped a novel tumor-specific computational framework that finds the likely causative SGAs in
an individual tumor and estimates their impact on oncogenic processes, which suggests the
disease mechanisms that are acting in that tumor. This information can be used to guide preci-
sion oncology. We report a tumor-specific causal inference (TCI) framework, which estimates
causative SGAs by modeling causal relationships between SGAs and molecular phenotypes
(e.g., transcriptomi c, proteomic, or metabolomic changes) within an individual tumor. We
applied the TCI algorithm to tumors from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and estimated for
each tumor the SGAs that causally regulate the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in that
tumor. Overall, TCI identified 634 SGAs that are predicted to cause cancer-related DEGs in a
significant number of tumors, including most of the previously known drivers and many novel
candidate cancer drivers. The inferred causal relationships are statistically robust and biologi-
cally sensible, and multiple lines of experimental evidence support the predicted functional
impact of both the well-known and the novel candidate drivers that are predicted by TCI. TCI
provides a unified framework that integrates multiple types of SGAs and molecular phenotypes
to estimate which genome perturbations are causally influencing one or more molecular/cellu-
lar phenotypes in an individual tumor. By identifying major candidate drivers and revealing their
functional impact in an individual tumor, TCI sheds light on the disease mechanisms of that
tumor, which can serve to advance our basic knowledge of cancer biology and to support preci-
sion oncology that provides tailored treatment of individual tumors.
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1007088 July 5, 2019 1 / 29
a1111111111
a1111111111
a1111111111
a1111111111
a1111111111
OPEN ACCESS
Citation: Cai C, Cooper GF, Lu KN, Ma X, Xu S,
Zhao Z, et al. (2019) Systematic discove ry of the
functiona l impact of somatic genome alterations in
individual tumors through tumor-spe cific causal
inference. PLoS Comput Biol 15(7): e1007088.
https://do i.org/10.1371/j ournal.pc bi.1007088
Editor: Lewis J. Frey, MUSC, UNITED STATES
Received: January 25, 2019
Accepted: May 9, 2019
Published: July 5, 2019
Copyright: © 2019 Cai et al. This is an open access
article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attributi on License, which permits
unrestricted use, distribution , and reproduction in
any medium, provide d the original author and
source are credited .
Data Availabilit y Statement: PANCAN RNASeq
data, mutation data, and copy number data are
available in the Xena database under cohort TCGA
Pan-Cance r (PANCA N). L1000 LINCS cell line
perturbati on data is available in GEO database
under GSE70138. Source data are available from
the Cancer Genome Atlas project website . Result
data from this study are available as suppleme ntary
material of this publication.
Funding: Research reported in this publication was
supported by grant U54HG008540 awarded by the
National Human Genome Research Institute


===== PAGE 2 =====

Author summary
Precision oncology relies on the capability of identifying and targeting tumor-specific aberra-
tions resulting from causative genomic alterations in each tumor. Conventional cancer driver
identification methods identify candidate cancer driver genes as those exhibit an alteration fre-
quency significantly above the expected frequency that would occur by random chance in a
population of tumor samples. This population-based nature prevents them from performing
instance-specific discovery, and alteration frequency does not contain information regarding
the functional impact of candidate driver genes identified in this approach. Here, we report a
novel Bayesian causal discovery framework, referred to as tumor-specific causal inference
(TCI), which identifies candidate driver genes as the ones that bear significant functional
impact on cancer-related molecular phenotypes at the individual tumor level. By discovering
candidate drivers and their function impact in each individual tumor, TCI analysis reveals
information that is of value for both general cancer biology research and precision oncology.
Introduction
Cancer is mainly caused by a variety of SGAs, including, but not limited to, somatic mutations
(SMs) [1, 2], somatic DNA copy number alterations (SCNAs) [3, 4], chromosome structure
variations [5–7], and epigenetic changes [8–10]. Each tumor hosts a unique combination of
SGAs ranging in number from hundreds to thousands, of which only a small fraction contrib-
utes to tumorigenesis (drivers), while the rest are non-consequential (passengers). Identifying
causative SGAs that underlie different oncogenic processes [11], such as metastasis or immune
evasion, in an individual tumor is of fundamental importance in cancer biology and precision
oncology [12–14].
Current methods for identifying cancer driver genes concentrate on finding those that have
a higher than expected mutation rate in a cohort of tumor samples [15–17]. Some methods
focus on specific mutation sites (e.g., mutation hotspots at specific amino acids or within the
3D functional domain of a protein) that likely affect the function of those proteins encoded by
the mutant genes [17–22]. These mutation-centric, frequency-based models have successfully
identified many major oncogenes and tumor suppressors across cancer types. However, they
do not directly determine the functional impact of mutations, because mutation frequency of a
gene (either at the gene or at the specific amino acid level) does not directly reflect which
molecular or cellular processes will be affected by the altered gene product.
Besides mutations, other SGA events affecting driver genes also contribute to cancer devel-
opment, such as SCNAs [3, 4, 23], chromosome structure variation [5–7], and epigenetic
changes [8–10]. Currently, analyses of SMs, SCNAs, structure variation, and epigenetic data
are usually carried out separately, with distinct statistical models for different types of data [1,
2, 16, 24, 25]. Such disconnection is largely due to the lack of a unifying statistical framework
that is able to integrate diverse data. Integrating diverse data can provide increased statistical
power to detect biological function and to gain biological insights by pooling diverse informa-
tion to assess the role of a driver gene in oncogenesis. A Bayesian approach has the potential to
provide such a unifying framework.
Some recent studies have started to employ a Bayesian framework to infer relationships
between cancer driver mutations and other omics changes, such as transcriptomic changes.
Razi et al. proposed a hybrid Bayesian method to capture the non-linear regulatory effects on
the gene expression levels based on a predefined signaling network [26]. The iDriver is another
non-parametric Bayesian framework developed by Yang et al. which models the joint distribu-
tion of multiomics data and identified 45 novel driver genes that showed significant deviations
from the background in at least one omics data [27]. The above methods employ a Bayesian
Tumor-sp ecific causal inferenc e
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1007088 July 5, 2019 2 / 29
through funds provided by the trans-NIH Big Data
to Knowled ge (BD2K) initiative (www.bd2k .nih.
gov). Funding also came from R01LM012 011 and
R00LM01 1673 awarde d by the National Library of
Medicine, from Grant #410007 0287 awarded by
the Pennsylvania Department of Health, and from
Grant # PC150190 awarde d by the Department of
Defense. The content is solely the responsibi lity of
the authors and does not necessa rily represent the
official views of the National Institutes of Health or
the Pennsylvania Department of Health or the
Department of Defense . The funders had no role in
study design, data collection and analysis, decision
to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.
Competing interests : The authors have declared
that no competing interests exist.


===== PAGE 3 =====

approach to estimate model parameters, rather than searching for causal networks, which is
the focus of the current paper. More recently, Wang et al. developed a Bayesian (regularized)
regression model, referred to as rDriver, to model the relationships between mutations and
gene expression changes [28]. However, it is a population-based regression method, which
does not take into account the tumor-specific changes.
In this study, we designed a general framework based on Bayesian causal modeling and dis-
covery [29–31] that estimates the causal relationships between SGAs and molecular pheno-
types observed in an individual tumor [32]. We call it the Tumor-specific Causal Inference
(TCI) method. By being Bayesian in design, TCI is flexible in the types of data that define both
the SGAs and the molecular phenotypes. By being tumor-specific, TCI is able to model the
functional causal relationships between the SGAs and the molecular phenotypes in a given
tumor. The tumor-specific nature of the TCI differentiates it from previous methods that aim
to detect the association between genomic variations and quantitative traits, in particular, the
expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) analysis, which is a population-based method that
requires a large number of cases to estimate associations between SGAs and molecular pheno-
types across a population of tumors [33, 34]. However, eQTL does not predict the causal influ-
ence of SGAs on molecular phenotypes in a given tumor. Identification of SGAs that have a
specific functional impact on molecular phenotypes in an individual tumor can help to differ-
entiate candidate driver SGAs from passengers and shed light on the disease mechanism of
that tumor, which could guide precision treatment of the tumor.
Results
TCI is an integrative framework for discovering the functional impact of
SGAs in an individual tumor
We designed the TCI algorithm to discover the causal relationships between SGAs and
DEGs observed in an individual tumor. Specifically, given a tumor t hosting a set of SGAs
(SGA_SET
t
) and a set of DEGs (DEG_SET
t
), TCI estimates the causal relationships between
SGAs and DEGs using a bipartite causal Bayesian network [29–31] (Fig 1). It searches for the
tumor-specific causal model M
t
with a maximal posterior probability P(M
t
|D) given the data-
set D (containing SGAs and DEGs). The tumor-specific nature of the TCI model is reflected
by the assumption that a molecular phenotype change (e.g., a DEG) observed in a specific
tumor should be attributed with a high probability to one of the SGAs observed in the tumor
that explains the phenotype well in the dataset D, or alternatively, to a non-specific cause
denoted as A
0
that collectively represents unmeasured genomic events or non-SGA causes,
such as the tumor microenvironment (Detailed description of TCI method is included in S1
Text).
Although the indices of the SGAs and DEGs for the patient case shown are sequential, but
in general they would indicate different SGAs and DEGs in different tumors.
TCI achieves tumor-specific causal discovery through several innovative approaches. Con-
sider a collection of genomic data (denoted as D) from TCGA, and the data from a new tumor
t hosting a set of SGAs (SGA_SET
t
) and a set of DEGs (DEG_SET
t
). For a DEG event E
i
among
the DEG_SET
t
, TCI aims to identify an SGA A
h
among the SGA_SET
t
that most likely caused
E
i
, or alternatively, TCI may assign the factor A
0
as a non-specific cause. TCI evaluates the pos-
terior probability that A
h
causes E
i
, which we denote as A
h
!E
i
, using a Bayesian framework as
follows:
P A
h
! E
i
jDð Þ ¼
1
Z
P A
h
! E
i
ð ÞP DjA
h
! E
i
ð Þ; ð1Þ
Tumor-sp ecific causal inferenc e
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1007088 July 5, 2019 3 / 29


===== PAGE 4 =====

where
Z ¼
P
jSGA
S
ET
t
j
j¼0
P ðA
j
! E
i
ÞP ðDjA
j
! E
i
Þ ð2Þ
is a normalization term. From the above equations, one can see that a potential causal SGA A
h
only competes with other SGAs observed in the same tumor to explain a molecular phenotype
E
i
. This allows a less frequent SGA (A
h
) to be assigned with high posterior probability as the
cause for a changed phenotype (E
i
) in a specific tumor, as long as A
h
is the most plausible
cause when compared with the other SGAs in the same tumor. TCI involves the two terms on
the right of the Eq 1: the prior probability that A
h
causes E
i
, namely, P(A
h
!E
i
), which can be
evaluated at a population-level prior to observing current tumor t, and the conditional proba-
bility (aka the marginal likelihood) of data D, P(D|A
h
!E
i
), given that A
h
!E
i
, which assesses
the functional impact of the causal edges (Supplementary method in S1 Text). This approach
allows TCI to integrate useful aspects of a frequency-oriented framework (via the prior proba-
bility) and a cellular-function-oriente d framework (via the marginal likelihood). An important
innovation of TCI is the procedure for evaluating P(D|A
h
!E
i
), which consist of assessing how
well A
h
explains the variance of E
i
in tumors hosting A
h
(aka, “tumors like me”), as well as how
well the variance of E
i
is explained in tumors do not host A
h
. Finally, depending on the compo-
sition of SGA_SET
t
, the tumor-specific prior probability P(A
h
!E
i
) for the same causal edge
between A
h
and E
i
can be different in different tumors, and therefore tumor-specific (see the
Materials and methods section for details).
We applied TCI to analyze data from 5,097 tumors across 16 cancer types in TCGA
(https://cancergenome.nih.gov/ , S1 Table) to derive 5,097 tumor-specific models (one causal
network model per tumor). As a concrete example to illustrate the characteristics of the TCI
Fig 1. Workflow of TCI analysis. A. A compend ium of cancer omics data is used as the training dataset. Three types of data from the 5,097 pan-cancer tumors were
used in this study, including SM data (774,483 mutation events in 22,580 genes), SCNA data (1,612,667 copy number alteration events in 25,038 genes), and gene
expression data (13,563,53 0 DEG events in 20,411 genes). SM and SCNA data were integrated as SGA data. Expressi on of each gene in each tumor was compared to a
distribution of the same gene in the “normal control” samples, and, if a gene’s express ion value was outside the significance boundary , it was designate d as a DEG in the
tumor. The final dataset included 5,097 tumors with 1,364,207 SGA events and 13,549,660 DEG events. B. A set of SGAs and a set of DEGs from an individual tumor as
input for TCI modeling . C. The TCI algorit hm infers the causal relations hips between SGAs and DEGs for a given tumor t and output a tumor-spec ific causal model. D.
A hypothet ic model illustrates the results of TCI analysis. In this tumor, SGA_SET
t
has three SGAs plus the non-spe cific factor A
0
, and DEG_SET
t
has six DEG variables.
Each E
i
must have exactly one arc into it, which represents having one cause among the variable s in SGA_SET
t
. In this model, E
1
is caused by A
0
; E
2
, E
3
, E
4
are caused by
A
1
; E
5
, E
6
are caused by A
3
; A
2
does not have any regulatory impact.
https://do i.org/10.1371/j ournal.pc bi.1007088. g001
Tumor-sp ecific causal inferenc e
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1007088 July 5, 2019 4 / 29


===== PAGE 5 =====

framework, we present the TCI results of discovering the tumor-specific causes of differential
expression of the proto-onco-gene MPL that is commonly observed in tumors. Thrombopoie-
tin receptor MPL (TPO-R), a major regulator of megakaryocytopoies is and platelet formation,
is a proto-oncogene whose ligand (TPO) has been recently identified as a novel candidate
marker for ovarian cancer diagnosis and is associated with a poor survival [35, 36]. In recent
work, Ismail el al. developed a breast cancer mouse model and found MPL is linked to cell
death induction and tumor growth suppression [37]. There is evidence to indicate that the
expression of MPL is regulated by the PI3K/AKT signaling pathway [38], which includes as
members PIK3CA, PTEN, PIK3R1, AKT1 (Fig 2A), and other gene products. The uniqueness
of TCI lies at the fact that it seeks to learn the causal relationships between SGAs and DEGs at
the individual tumor level. Our assumption is that a DEG is likely to be regulated by one aber-
rant pathway in a tumor, and such a pathway usually is perturbed by an SGA that affects one
member of the pathway. This assumption is based on the observation that SGAs perturbing
members of a common pathway rarely co-occur in an individual tumor, which is a phenome-
non referred to as mutual exclusivity [39–41]. Thus, tumors with an aberrant PI3K/AKT path-
way usually host an SGA in one of these members, although they likely share target genes, e.g.,
the DEG MPL. A causal discovery algorithm should attribute an MPL DEG event in a tumor
to a member SGA of the PI3K/AKT pathway with high probability if one of those SGAs
appears in the tumor. Indeed, in the tumors exhibiting differentially expressed MPL, TCI
assigns the highest probability to a member of PI3K/AKT pathway if it is altered in the same
tumor. TCI identified PIK3CA as the most frequent cause for DEG of MPL (in 200 tumors),
while PTEN is ranked the second most common cause (in 140 tumors). Interestingly, AKT1
and PIK3R1 are also among the top 10 most frequent causes of an MPL DEG (in 11 tumors
and 10 tumors, respectively) (Fig 2B).
As a comparison, we also performed eQTL analyses [33, 34] to identify the SGAs that are
associated with DEG events in MPL. eQTL assesses the strength of association of genomic varia-
tions on a quantitative trait (e.g., expression of a gene) at the population level, which is often
used to study functional consequence of genomic variations. To perform eQTL analysis, we
used the R package MatrixEQTL [42] which is a widely used tool specifically designed for ultra-
fast eQTL analysis of large datasets (589 citations since 2012). It is also an official tool of the
GTEx project (https://gtexportal.org/home/) and is used in the seeQTL browser (https://seeqtl.
org/). We evaluated the association of all SGAs observed in TCGA with respect to expression
change of MPL, and the p values for the association of four members of the PI3K/AKT pathway
were ranked as 3
rd
(PIK3CA), 5,690
th
(PTEN), 7,661
th
(AKT1) and 14,563
th
(PIK3R1) among all
other SGA events (Fig 2C) observed in the TCGA PANCAN cohort. For each tumor, we identi-
fied the SGA that had the strongest association with MPL DEG, according to the eQTL-derived
p-values. The results showed that PIK3CA was ranked 1
st
, PTEN was ranked 113
rd
, PIK3R1 was
ranked 128
th
, and AKT1 was ranked 165
th
as possible causes for MPL DEG in individual
tumors. Thus, while eQTL analysis can identify PIK3CA as an important regulator of MPL
expression, unlike TCI it does not attribute SGAs in other members of PI3K/AKT pathway as
major causes for the changed expression of MPL at the population level.
TCI predicts the most probable tumor-specific causative SGA for each
DEG
We defined an SGA event in a tumor as an SGA with functional impact (SGA-FI) if it was pre-
dicted by TCI to causally regulate 5 or more DEGs in the tumor with an expected false discov-
ery rate ~ 10
−7
for discovering SGA-FIs from randomized in silico experiments, which is
determined based a series of random simulation experiments. (Methods and S1 Fig).
Tumor-sp ecific causal inferenc e
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1007088 July 5, 2019 5 / 29


===== PAGE 6 =====

Fig 2. Estimation of the most probable causative SGAs for MPL by TCI and eQTL. A. A diagram of PI3K/AKT pathway, with
PIK3CA, PTEN, PIK3R1 and AKT1 as key signaling proteins in the pathway. B. Results of TCI analysis of the most probable
causes of the DEG MPL. There are ~300 SGAs and ~3,000 DEGs in each tumor on average, which are organize d as a bipartite
Tumor-sp ecific causal inferenc e
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1007088 July 5, 2019 6 / 29


===== PAGE 7 =====

We identified a total of 634 genes that were called as SGA-FIs in more than 30 tumors with
an SGA-FI call rate of 25% or greater in our pan-cancer analysis (Methods and S2 Table). The
call rate for an SGA A
h
is the ratio of number of tumors in which A
h
is designated an SGA-FI
over the number of tumors in which A
h
occurs. These SGA-FIs include the majority of the pre-
viously published drivers [1, 2], as well as many novel candidate drivers. For 302 well known
drivers from literature [1, 2], we found 93 were called as significant SGA-FIs and 262 were
called as SGA-FIs in at least one tumor. Note that if SGAs in a well-known driver do not affect
gene expression, e.g., mutation or deletion of BRCA1, TCI would not be able to detect its func-
tional impact. In addition to protein-coding genes, TCI also identified SGA events affecting
microRNAs and intergenic non-protein-coding RNAs (e.g., MIR31HG [43, 44], MIR30B [45],
and PVT1 [46]) as SGA-FIs, (S2 Table).
We further identified target DEGs for the 634 significant SGA-FIs. To minimize false dis-
covery, we required that a target DEG of an SGA-FI be regulated by the corresponding SGA-FI
in at least 50 tumors or in 20% or more of all tumors in which the SGA was called as an SGA-FI.
Since it is statistically difficult to evaluate whether the causal relationship between an SGA-FI
and its predicted target DEG within an individual tumor is valid, we adopted a “pan-cancer”
analysis approach to determine whether each predicted SGA!DEG causal relationship is con-
served across tumors in different cancer types. We appreciate that there are cancer-type-specific
effects, and we did applied the TCI algorithm to tumors of each tissue of origin or cell type to
infer the causal relationships, although our presentation did not concentrate on such results.
We addressed this issue in two major ways. First, when performing pan-cancer analysis, the
goal is to identify the causal relationships that are shared among different cancer types, and con-
servation of causal relationships across different cancer types is a strong indication that the dis-
covered causal relationship is more likely to be true. Therefore, we required that a causal edge is
conserved in at least two types of cancers when TCI is applied to tissue-specific data. Second,
since tissue-specific prevalence of certain SGAs and DEGs can create a confounding effect, in
that they may appear to have correlations in a subset of tumors at the pan-cancer level. To miti-
gate such confounding effects, we specifically identified tissue-specific DEGs and removed
them from pan-cancer analysis. We determine a DEG is a tissue-type-specific DEG if it exists in
more than 90% of the tumors in one cancer type or tissue type while it appears in less than 1%
of the tumors in other cancer types. We found and removed 44 such DEGs from further analysis
(Materials and methods). We then set out to assess whether the inferred causal relationships are
supported by existing knowledge and experimental studies. Finally, we performed preliminary
laboratory experiments on selected SGA-FIs to evaluate the causal relationships between novel
candidate drivers and their target DEGs predicted by TCI.
The landscape of causative SGAs identified by TCI
We compared the distribution of the number of SGAs and SGA-FIs per tumor across cancer
types (Fig 3A and 3B). The average number of SGAs per tumor across cancer types was 268,
graph respective ly. Solid green squares represent SGAs present in the curren t tumor; empty green square represent SGAs not
present in the current tumor. For a DEG observed in a tumor, e.g., MPL, TCI aims to search for the most probable cause among
SGAs observed in the tumor. An arrow represents a causal link between an SGA and a DEG, while the weight of an arrow
represents the posterior probabil ity that the SGA causes the DEG in the curren t tumor. PIK3CA is predicted to be the most
probable cause for DEG MPL in 200 tumors; thus, we rank PIK3CA as 1
st
. PTEN is the most probable cause for DEG MPL in 140
tumors, ranking it as the 2
nd
most probable cause of DEG MPL. AKT1 is the most probable cause for DEG MPL in 11 tumors,
and PIK3R1 is the most probable cause for DEG MPL in 10 tumors. C. eQTL analysis of the possible causes of DEG MPL. eQTL
considers all SGAs (i.e., ~17,600 SGAs) as possible causes for DEG MPL. The p values of PIK3CA, PTEN, PIK3R1 and AKT1 were
ranked as having the 3
rd
, 5,690
th
, 7,661
th
and 14,563
th
stronges t association with DEG MPL, respectively.
https://do i.org/10.1371/j ournal.pc bi.1007088. g002
Tumor-sp ecific causal inferenc e
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1007088 July 5, 2019 7 / 29


===== PAGE 8 =====

Fig 3. The landscap e of SGAs and SGA-FIs. A & B. The distributions of SGAs per tumor and SGA-FI s per tumor of differe nt cancer types. Beneath the bar box plots,
the distributions of different types of SGAs (SM, copy number amplificati on, and deletion) are shown. C. Distribution of SGA-FI s against the alteration frequenc y and
protein length. Pink dots indicate SGA-FIs , and green dots represent SGAs that were not designated as SGA-FI s. A few commonly altered genes are indicated by their
gene names, where genes labeled with blue font are well-known drivers, and those labeled with orange font are novel candidate driver. D. Tumor-sp ecific Bayesian
prior distributions for top 15 most frequent SGAs. The number above each box represents number of tumors that the correspond ing SGA appears in. E. A Circos plot
shows SGA events and SGA-FI calls along the chromoso mes. Different types of SGA events (SM, copy number amplificati on, deletion) are shown in tracks 2, 3, and 4,
respectively. Track 1 shows the number of times that an SGA is labeled by TCI as an SGA-FI. The gene names denote the top 62 SGA-FIs (some are SGA units) that
were called in over 300 tumors with a call rate > 0.8. Genes labeled with blue font are known drivers from two TCGA reports, and orange ones are novel candidate
drivers. F. SGA-FIs that were called in less than 300 tumors and with a call rate > 0.9 are shown in this frequenc y-vs-call rate plot. As before, genes labeled with blue
font are known drivers from TCGA studies, and orange ones are novel candidate drivers.
https://doi.o rg/10.1371/j ournal.pcbi. 1007088.g003
Tumor-sp ecific causal inferenc e
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1007088 July 5, 2019 8 / 29


===== PAGE 9 =====

whereas the average number of SGA-FIs identified by TCI was approximately 34 per tumor.
Interestingly, TCI designated all SGAs with very high alteration frequency (perturbed in more
than 500 tumors, or > 10%) as SGA-FIs (Fig 3C). One immediate concern for TCI is that it
might call certain long genes, such as TTN and MUC16, as SGA-FIs solely due to their high
genomic alteration rate. This concern was addressed by adopting statistical test results from
MutSigCV analysis, which specifically addressed the biased mutation rate introduced by
lengths and chromosome locations of genes. In our analysis, we represented the predicted
effect of gene length and location by way of the prior probability term P(A
h
!E
i
), and as such,
the prior probabilities for certain long genes, such as TTN and MUC16, were several orders
of magnitude lower than other frequently altered well-known drivers (Fig 3D). Thus, the
strength of statistical relationships between SGAs in these genes and their target DEGs, as con-
veyed by the marginal likelihood term P(D|A
h
!E
i
), must be sufficiently high to overcome the
low prior probabilities of these genes being regulators of DEGs. Many SGA-FIs with an alter-
ation frequency ranging from 30 to 500 tumors (0.5–10%) appear among other SGAs with
similar protein lengths and alteration rates (Fig 3C). Since genes with similar protein length
and alteration rate usually have similar prior probabilities of being drivers, TCI differentiated
SGA-FIs from others based mainly on the difference in marginal probability P(D|A
h
!E
i
) asso-
ciated with an SGA and candidate target DEGs. These results indicate that the function-ori-
ented nature of TCI plays a significant role in detecting SGA-FIs.
We illustrated the landscape of common SGA events (Fig 3E) using a Circos plot (http://
circos.ca/), and highlighted 44 SGA-FIs identified by TCI in more than 300 tumors (> 6% of
the tumors) with a call rate (fraction of SGA instances affecting a gene being called as an
SGA-FI event) greater than 0.8. The plot illustrates the integrative approach of TCI, which
combines different types of SGA events in a gene and detects their function impact. For exam-
ple, TCI combined mutation and deletion events in LRP1B (at 1 to 2 o’clock position on the
plot) to detect common functional impact of these SGA events (see later section), whereas call-
ing SGA-FI events for ERBB2 (Her2) is mostly associated with amplification of the gene. TCI
also designated many relatively low-frequency SGAs as SGA-FIs (in ~ 30 tumors or ~ 0.5%)
with high call rates (> 0.9) (Fig 3F). Of interest, besides identifying well-known cancer drivers,
e.g., TP53, PIK3CA, PTEN, KRAS, and CDKN2A) as SGA-FIs, TCI also designated as SGA-FIs
some very frequently altered genes, e.g., TTN, CSMD3, MUC16, LRP1B, and ZFHX4, whose
roles in cancer development remain controversial. These genes are excluded from driver gene
lists when assessed by mutation-centered and frequency-based methods [2, 16], but other
computational and experimental studies [47–49] suggest that some of them are likely cancer
drivers.
Combining SM and SCNA enhances detection of the functional impact of
genes affected by SGAs
A cancer driver gene is often perturbed by multiple types of SGA events that exert common
functional impact. For example, an oncogene, such as PIK3CA, is usually affected by activating
mutations or copy number amplifications, whereas a tumor suppressor, such PTEN, is usually
affected by inactivating mutations or copy number deletions. An SCNA event (amplification
or deletion of a chromosome fragment) in a tumor often encloses many genes, making it a
challenge to distinguish the functional impact of genes within a SCNA fragment.
TCI addresses this problem by integrating both SM and SCNA data, which can create vari-
ances in overall SGA events among genes within a SCNA fragment. When combined with SM
data, PIK3CA clearly has a higher combined alteration rate than its neighbor genes in the same
DNA region with very similar amplification rate in cytoband 3q26. While its neighbor genes
Tumor-sp ecific causal inferenc e
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1007088 July 5, 2019 9 / 29


===== PAGE 10 =====

share almost identical copy number amplification profile across all tumors, the alteration pro-
file of PIK3CA is significantly different when both SM and SCNA data are considered (Fig
4A). When calculating whether amplification of PIK3CA is causally responsible for a DEG
observed in a tumor, TCI uses the statistics collected from all tumors with PIK3CA alterations,
including both CN amplification and SM, to compute the marginal likelihood and predict
whether a causal relationship between PIK3CA amplification and the DEG exists in the tumor.
As such, the algorithm is able to differentiate the functional impact of PIK3CA amplification
from that of other co-amplified genes. We noted that many genes were affected by both SMs
and SCNAs patterns, including CSMD3 and ZFHX4 (Fig 4A), enabling TCI to detect the func-
tional impact of these SCNA events.
By combining both SM and SCNA data, TCI is able to identify common functional impact
of distinct types of SGA events affecting the same gene across different tumors and cancer
types. For example, PIK3CA is often perturbed by either SMs or CN amplifications (Fig 4B)
although prevalence of each type is different in different cancer types. In breast cancers
(BRCA), PIK3CA is commonly altered by SMs; in ovarian cancers (OV), it is more often
affected by CN amplification; in head and neck squamous carcinoma (HNSC), it is almost
equally altered by SMs and CN amplification. As a well-known cancer driver in many cancer
types, it is expected that amplification and mutations of PIK3CA should share a common func-
tional impact in causally regulating a common set of DEGs.
Taking advantage of the tumor-specific inference capability of TCI analysis, we identified
the target DEGs regulated by each SGA event affecting PIK3CA (either SM or SCNA) in indi-
vidual tumors. DEGs predicted to be caused by either PIK3CA SM or CN amplification have
very similar positive predictive values (PPV) with respect to SGA events in PIK3CA. The PPV
is calculated as the ratio of number of tumors in which a DEG is designated as target of an
SGA-FI such as PIK3CA over all tumors in which PIK3CA is called as an SGA-FI (Fig 4F and
Methods), which reflect the strength of causal relationships between an SGA and its target
DEG. The results indicate that perturbation of PIK3CA by both SM and CN amplification
have very similar functional impact on gene expression changes. We then examined whether
target DEGs caused by PIK3CA SM overlap with those caused by CN amplification, and
indeed the DEG members of the two list significantly overlapped (Fig 4J). Thus, TCI detected
the shared functional impact of distinct types of SGAs perturbing PIK3CA across different can-
cer types. Similar results were obtained for other 249 SGA-FIs (S3 Table) that were commonly
perturbed by both SMs and SCNAs (with each type accounting for > 20% of instances for each
SGA-FI), including CDKN2A, CSMD3 and ZFHX4 (Fig 4).
Causal relationships inferred by TCI are statistically robust
To evaluate validity of the results by TCI, we first examined whether the causal relationships
reported by TCI reflect true statistical relationships between SGA and DEG events rather than
random noise in the data. We generated a series of random datasets using the TCGA data, in
which the DEG status of each gene expression variable was permuted among the tumors, while
the SGA status in each tumor remained as reported by TCGA. After permutation, the statisti-
cal relationships between SGAs and DEGs are expected to be random. We then applied TCI to
these random datasets and compared the posterior probabilities of the most probable causal
edges for each DEG derived using real and permuted data. The results (Fig 5A) show TCI was
able to differentiate true statistical relationships between SGAs and DEGs from random ones
in that it assigned higher posterior probabilities to candidate edges obtained from real data
(red lines) than those obtained from random data (blue lines). As expected, a large number of
derived causal edges from well-known cancer drivers (e.g., TP53 and PIK3CA) were assigned
Tumor-sp ecific causal inferenc e
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1007088 July 5, 2019 10 / 29


===== PAGE 11 =====

Fig 4. SM and SCNA perturbi ng a gene exert common functional impact. A. Combining SM and SCNA data drisrupts the correlation structure among genes
enclosed in common SCNA fragment s. The chromo some cytobands enclosing three example genes (PIK3CA, CSMD3, and ZFHX4) are shown. The bar charts show
the frequenc y of SCNA (red, standing for amplificato n) and SM (green). The disequilibri um plots beneath the bar charts depict the correlations hip among genes
within a cytoband. B-E. The SGA patterns, i.e. SM and CN amplificati on/deletion, across different cancer types for PIK3CA, CDKN2A, CSMD3 and ZFHX4, F-I.
SGA-FI target DEG call rates in SM tumors and CN amplification/ deletion for PIK3CA, CDKN2A, CSMD3 and ZFHX4. J-M. Venn diagrams illustring the
relationships of DEGs caused by CN amplication/ deletion and SM for PIK3CA, CDKN2A, CSMD3 and ZFHX4.
https://doi.org/10 .1371/journal.p cbi.1007088.g0 04
Tumor-sp ecific causal inferenc e
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1007088 July 5, 2019 11 / 29


===== PAGE 12 =====

high posterior probabilities. Interestingly, the results also show many causal edges from other
common SGA-FIs (TTN, CSMD3, MUC16, and ZFHX4) to DEGs were also assigned higher
posterior probabilities than would be expected by random chance, indicating that perturbing
these genes had significant impact on transcriptomics of the tumors (Fig 5A and S2A Fig). The
function-oriented nature of TCI is reflected by observations that there are certain SGAs with a
high alteration frequency (occurring in close to 10% of tumors) that were not designated as
SGA-FIs by TCI. For example, WASHC5 has SGA events in 457 tumors but few of these SGA
events were assigned with high posterior probabilities of being SGA-FIs by TCI; similar results
were observed for TBC1D31 (424 tumors) and ADGRB1 (420 tumors) (S2B Fig).
To further exclude the possibility that TCI-reported causal relationships from a high-fre-
quency SGA to DEGs were random associations due to their high alteration frequencies, we
Fig 5. Statistica l and experimen tal evaluation of TCI predictio ns. A. The causal relationship inferred by TCI is statisticall y sound. Plots in this panel show the
probability density distributi on of the highest posteri or probabil ities assigned to each DEG in TCGA dataset, when the TCI algorithms was applied to real data
(red) and two random datasets, in which DEGs permuta ted across all tumors (blue) and the correspond ing SGA permutat ed across all tumors (green). The panel
on the left shows the results for the posterior probabil ities for all most probable candidate edges in whole dataset; rest of the plots show the distributi ons of
posterior probaibliti es of most probable edges pointing from 3 specific SGAs to predicted target DEGs. B. Boxplots of q-values of t-test associated with predicted
target DEGs for 8 SGA-FIs in different LINCS cell lines that were experimenta lly perturbed. Each box represent one SGA perturbed in one cell line. For example,
APC-HA1E denotes that APC perturbed in HA1E cell line. Each black dot represents a q-value associate d with a target DEG of an SGA-FI, when the express ion
value was assessed with a t-test of the before and after genetic manipulation of a given SGA-FI gene.
https://doi.o rg/10.1371/j ournal.pcbi. 1007088.g005
Tumor-sp ecific causal inferenc e
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1007088 July 5, 2019 12 / 29


===== PAGE 13 =====

conducted another series of single-SGA-permutati on experiments, in which the SGA events of
a gene (e.g., TTN) were randomly permuted across all tumors to disrupt the statistical relation-
ships between SGAs of this gene and DEGs, while the overall frequency of the SGAs of the
gene remains the same. We performed such single-SGA-permutation experiments for the 6
most commonly altered genes: TP53, TTN, PIK3CA, CSMD3, MUC16, and ZFHX4. The results
(Fig 5A and S2B Fig) also show that when TCI analysis was applied to these permuted data
(green lines), none of these 6 genes were designated as an SGA-FI according to our criteria.
Taken together, these results support that TCI is detecting valid (non-spurious) statistical rela-
tionships between SGA and DEG events in real data.
Causal relationships inferred by TCI are biologically sensible
We further evaluated whether the TCI-inferred causal relationships between SGAs and DEGs
agree with existing knowledge and experimental results. We compared the predicted causal
relationships between PIK3CA and DEGs with experimental results from an independent
study. Recently, Hart et al. [50] studied the functional impact of a single mutation, H1047R, of
PIK3CA by knocking in the mutation into the breast epithelial cell line MCF-10A and compar-
ing the transcriptomic profile between the wild type and the PIK3CA
H1047R
isogenic cell lines,
which is the only transcriptomic study that is associated with the PIK3CA hotspot mutation so
far. They identified 1,434 DEGs caused by the introduction of the mutation. We note that
there exist differences among different cell lines and also between cell lines and tumor samples.
In order to bridge the gap between cell lines and Pan-cancer tumor samples, we extracted the
BRCA samples and compared the TCI-predicted PIK3CA target DEGs in breast cancer tumors
with that from Hart’s study. We found that 12 out of 92 TCI-predicted PIK3CA SM driving
DEGs overlap with the experimentally-derived DEG set (hypergeometric test p = 0.01).
Since RB1 protein regulates the function of transcription factor E2F1[51], it is expected that
E2F1-regulated genes should be enriched among the RB1-targeted DEGs predicted by TCI.
We used the PASTAA program[52] (trap.molgen.mpg.de/PASTAA. htm) to search for motif
binding sites in the promoters of the 237 DEGs that TCI predicted to be regulated by RB1, and
it found that E2F1, E2F2, and DP-1 were the three top transcription factors for these genes
(p < 10
−6
).
We also used the large-scale perturbation experiments carried by the Library of Integrated
Network-Based Cellular Signatures (LINCS) project [53] to evaluate predicted causal relation-
ships between SGA-FIs and their predicted target DEGs. The LINCS project performed sys-
tematic gene-manipulation (knockdown and overexpression) experiments using small
interfering RNAs targeting over 4,000 genes in multiple cell lines, and cellular responses were
measured as expression changes in 978 landmark genes (using a technology referred to as the
L1000 assay). We selected the 8 most frequent SGA-FIs that were also experimentally manipu-
lated in the LINCS project and performed t-tests on the expression values of all L1000 genes
and analyzed the results of the perturbation experiments relative to the control condition in
each cell line. We then examined the statistical significance of these differences and assessed
the false discovery rate (q values) associated with the predicted target DEGs of each SGA. For
each of the 8 SGA-FIs, the majority of predicted target DEGs were differentially expressed in
multiple cell lines after experimental manipulation of the SGA-FI genes (Fig 5B). We note that
certain target DEGs of an SGA have tissue-specific expression patterns, and we organized tar-
geted DEGs according to tissue of origins and examined the percent of DEGs responding to
manipulation of corresponding SGAs (S4 Table). Interestingly, we also found that TTN was
perturbed in one cell line (VCAP), and 5 out of 7 predicted target DEGs responded to manipu-
lation of TTN. Among them, 4 genes (SPP1, STAT1, C5 and GPER1) are known to be
Tumor-sp ecific causal inferenc e
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1007088 July 5, 2019 13 / 29


===== PAGE 14 =====

associated with development and/or progression of cancer [54–57]. In summary, the causal
relationships between SGAs and DEGs predicted by TCI were supported by multiple lines of
examination, including the use of existing knowledge of these relationships as well as targeted
and systematic experimental results.
TCI indicated that CSMD3 and ZFHX4 are 4
th
and 12
th
most frequent SGA-FIs, and yet,
they are designated as cancer drivers (S2 Table) in previous studies [17–22]. We examined
whether experimental manipulations of CSMD3 and ZFHX4 expression affect oncogenic phe-
notypes. We identified two cancer cell lines, HGC27 and PC3, with CSMD3 and ZFHX4 ampli-
fication respectively, and we knocked down the expression of the two genes using siRNAs,
followed by monitoring cellular phenotypes (see Methods for details). Our results showed that
knocking down CSMD3 and ZFHX4 in the respective cell lines significantly attenuated cell
proliferation (viability) and migration (Fig 6A–6D). In addition, knockdown of ZFHX4
induced apoptosis (Fig 6E). These results provide support that these genes are involved in
maintaining the cancer-related cellular phenotypes in these cell lines.
SGA-FIs regulate genes involved in well-known oncogenic processes
To gain a better view of functional impacts of SGA-FIs in cancer development, we further
examined their impact on 1,855 genes from 17 cancer-related “hallmark” gene sets from the
MSigDB (http://software.broad institute.org/gsea/msigdb/index .jsp). On average, 374 cancer
hallmark genes are found to be differentially expressed in a tumor. TCI found 96 SGA-FIs that
are predicted to regulate members of these 1,855 hallmark genes. These results illustrate the
impact of an SGA on cancer hallmark processes. We listed the relationships between the 96
SGA-FIs with respect to the 17 cancer hallmark processes to identify the target DEGs for each
of 96 SGA-FIs (S5 Table). The relationships between top 45 SGA-FIs with largest number of
target DEGs with respect to the hallmark processes are shown in (Fig 7A). For example,
CTNNB1 is known as the top regulator of WNT pathway and it is predicted by TCI to cause
14% DEGs in HALLMARK_WNT_BETA_CA TENIN_SIGNALING pathway [58]; RB1 regu-
lates 15% of the genes in HALLMARK_E2F_TAR GETS [59]; TP53 regulates genes involved in
apoptosis and in a broad assortment of functions across many other oncogenic pathways [60,
61]; Our analysis also suggests that CDKN2A plays an important role in the epithelial-mesen-
chymal transition (EMT) process, which agrees with previous studies [62].
TCI analyses reveal functional connections among SGA-FIs
The causal relationships between SGAs and DEGs revealed by TCI enable us to explore
whether distinct SGAs in different tumors do in fact perturb a common signal, by examining if
they share overlapping target DEGs. To this end, we evaluated all pair-wise intersections
between target DEG sets of SGA-FIs to identify SGA pairs sharing significantly overlapping
target DEGs (p < 0.05 Fisher’s exact test, and q < 0.05), and found 2669 such SGA-FI pairs (S6
Table). We then organized SGA-FIs that perturb common signals into a graph, in which an
edge connecting a pair of SGA-FI nodes indicates significant overlap of their target DEGs. For
example, the top 15 SGA-FIs (ranked according to the FDR p values of overlapping DEG sets)
that share DEGs with PIK3CA include PTEN, CDH1, ERBB2, and GATA3, which are known
cancer drivers, and their connections agree with existing knowledge (Fig 7B) [63–65].
The capability of revealing functional connections among SGAs provides a means of evalu-
ating whether a novel candidate driver shares functional impact with well-known drivers,
which not only provides an indication of whether the candidate driver is involved in oncogenic
processes (and thus a candidate cancer driver gene) but also sheds light on which pathway it
may be involved in. The top 15 SGA-FIs sharing common target DEGs with TTN include
Tumor-sp ecific causal inferenc e
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1007088 July 5, 2019 14 / 29


===== PAGE 15 =====

Fig 6. Cell biology evaluatio n of oncogeni c properties of CSMD3 and ZHFX4. A-B. The impact of knocking down CSMD3 and ZFHX4 on cell
proliferation. C-D. The impact of knocking down CSMD3 and ZFHX4 on cell migration. E. Impact of ZFHX4 knockdown on apoptosis in PC3 cell line
measured by Annexin V and propidium iodide (PI) staining.
https://doi.o rg/10.1371/j ournal.pcbi. 1007088.g006
Tumor-sp ecific causal inferenc e
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1007088 July 5, 2019 15 / 29


===== PAGE 16 =====

some well-known drivers including APC, KRAS, and STK11 (Fig 7C). Therefore, TTN may
share similar functional impact with these known drivers. The top 15 SGA-FIs connected with
CSMD3 and ZFHX4 (Fig 7D and Fig 7E) also form densely connected networks that include
well-known cancer drivers, such as KRAS, GATA3, KEAP1, ERBB2 and STK11, suggesting that
alteration of CSMD3 and ZFHX4 may perturb some of the same signaling pathways as do
Fig 7. Detection of functional impact of SGA-FIs reveals functional connections among SGA-FIs. A. Top 45 SGAs-FIs (regulating the largest number of DEGs) and
their relations hips with 17 cancer hallmark gene sets. The value in a cell represents the fraction of genes in a hallmark gene set that is covered by the target DEGs of each
SGA-FI. B-E. Top 15 SGA-FI s that share the most significant overlapping target DEGswi th PIK3CA, TTN, CSMD3, and ZFHX4. An edge between a pair of SGA-FI
indicate that they share significan tly overlapping target DEG sets, and the thickness of the line is proporti onal to negative log of the p-values of overlapping target DEG
sets. F. An “oncoprint” illustrati ng the causal relations hips between the DEG RUNDC3B and its 3 main drivers according to TCI, namely, PIK3CA, CDKN2A, and
PTEN. Each column correspond s to a tumor; green bars indicate tumors in which TCI designate d each of the three SGA genes as a driver, regardless of what DEGs it
was driving in a given tumor. The causal relationship is color-co ded, which illustrates which SGA-FI is predicted by TCI to cause the RUNDC3B DEG event; the blue bar
indicates the DEG events that were assigned to SGA-FIs other than the above 3 SGA-FIs; gray bars indicate a wild type genomic and transcrip tomic status.
https://do i.org/10.1371/j ournal.pc bi.1007088. g007
Tumor-sp ecific causal inferenc e
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1007088 July 5, 2019 16 / 29


===== PAGE 17 =====

these known drivers. We found similar results for other common SGA-FIs, including
CDKN2A, PTEN, MUC16, and LRP1B (S3 Fig).
Transcription of a gene is often regulated by a pathway, and it is expected that major driver
SGAs of a DEG should include members of such a regulatory pathway. As an example, Fig 7F
shows the SGA events that TCI designated as the cause of differential expression of RUNDC3B
in different tumors. The TCI analysis indicates that PIK3CA is the most common cause.
Besides SGAs in PIK3CA, TCI inferred that SGAs in CDKN2A and PTEN are two other major
drivers of RUNDC3B DEG events. The results suggest that aberrations in PI3K pathway (as a
result of SGAs perturbing PIK3CA and PTEN) is the main cause of these DEG events, and
CDKN2A may act as an alternative regulator. It is also interesting to note that in certain tumors
when both SGAs affecting CDKN2A and PTEN were present, TCI assigned PTEN as the most
likely driver of RUNDC3B, instead of CDKN2A, even though the SGAs in the latter are more
frequent. The results indicate that although CDKN2A SGA events explain the overall DEG var-
iance of RUNDC3B better than PTEN, the strength of statistical association between PTEN and
some DEGs in certain tumors may be stronger than that of CDKN2A, and TCI can detect such
statistical relationships.
Tumor-specific causal inference reveals tumor-specific disease mechanisms
TCI analysis enables us to identify major SGAs that causally regulate molecular phenotypic
changes (in the current case, DEGs) in an individual tumor. In this way, TCI not only discov-
ers potential drivers of an individual tumor but also suggests which oncogenic processes they
may affect. Thus, TCI can provide insights about tumor-specific disease mechanisms, particu-
larly when more oncogenic phenotypic data types become available, such metabolomic data
and protein expression data.
TCI results enabled us to examine each tumor profiled by TCGA to identify the major can-
didate driver SGAs and their target DEGs. Further examining the DEGs involved in hallmark
biological processes allows us to study which biological processes an SGA affects. As an exam-
ple, Fig 8A shows the SGA-FIs and their target cancer processes for a tumor (TCGA-B1-A657)
of Kidney Renal Papillary cell carcinoma (KIRP), where genes in 9 oncogenic hallmark process
from MSigDB are significantly enriched among the DEGs, including the following pathways
that are strongly regulated by one of more SGA-FIs: the Epithelial Mesenchymal Transition
pathway, the KRAS signaling pathway, the TNFA signaling via NFKB pathway, and the IL2
STAT5 signaling. We also identified major SGA-FIs (according to the number of DEGs regu-
lated by them in the tumor) that affect these processes (Fig 8A). In this figure, a green arrow
indicates that an SGA-FI regulates at least 10% of the genes in the corresponding signaling
pathway. TCI identified 6 such SGA-FIs, including some well-known cancer drivers, such as
PTEN and NEFH, and potential cancer drivers mentioned in recent studies, such as TLK2[66],
USP13[67], and PIM3[68].
SGAs cause cancer by perturbing cellular signaling pathways, and a pathway usually con-
sists of multiple signaling proteins. Thus, it is possible that tumors having very distinct SGA
profiles may in fact share very similar patterns of pathway perturbation, thus sharing similar
gene expression profiles. We further identified another KIRP tumor (TCGA-HE-A5NL),
which shares a similar overall DEG profile to that of TCGA-B1-A657 (Fig 8B). These two
tumors shared 281 DEGs related to the aforementioned oncogenic processes, and many DEGs
in each oncogenic process were shared by the two tumors. However, each of these two tumors
also had its unique SGA set, such as 57 SGAs in TCGA-B1-A657, 65 in TCGA-HE-A5NL, and
only 2 common SGAs (CADM3 and NEFH). TCI discovered similar target DEGs for NEFH in
both tumors. Although many DEG members in each oncogenic process were shared, different
Tumor-sp ecific causal inferenc e
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1007088 July 5, 2019 17 / 29


===== PAGE 18 =====

Tumor-sp ecific causal inferenc e
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1007088 July 5, 2019 18 / 29


===== PAGE 19 =====

SGA-FIs were designated as their candidate drivers. The above results illustrate that TCI is
able to suggest disease mechanisms of individual tumors, and such information can be further
analyzed to suggest tumors sharing common disease mechanisms.
Discussion
TCI is novel computational framework to assess whether a genomic alteration event causally
influences one or more molecular/cellular phenotypes at the level of individual tumor. This
tumor-specific and causality-center framework provides a new perspective to study cancer
driver genes and disease mechanisms of individual tumors. The tumor-specific nature of TCI
enables discovering causal relationships and shedding light on disease mechanism of an indi-
vidual tumor. Further exploring the commonality and differences in disease mechanisms of a
large number of tumors in the population will significantly help us better understand cancer
biology in general. More importantly, understanding the disease mechanism of each tumor
lays a solid foundation for guiding personalized therapies and advancing precision oncology.
The causality-centered nature of the TCI provides a unifying framework to combining data
(statistics) of different types of SGAs, eliminating the need of separately assessing whether
mutations, or SCNAs, or other SGA events in a gene are over-enriched in a cancer population
by conventional approaches, which would require reconciling measurements and baseline
models associated with each type of SGA. Integrating diverse types of SGA events is statistically
sensible which increases the statistical power for assessing the functional impact of perturbing
a candidate driver gene. It is also biologically sensible that a driver gene is often perturbed by
different types of SGA events leading to common functional impact. The fact that a gene is
often perturbed by different types of SGAs leading to common phenotypic changes provides
strong support that the gene is a candidate driver because its functional impact is positively
selected in cancer.
Our analyses of TCGA data revealed the functional impact of many well-known, as well as
a large number of novel SGA-FIs, with a wide range of prevalence in tumors ranging from 1%
to more than 10%. These results serve as a catalogue of major SGA events that potentially con-
tribute to cancer development. Discovery of novel candidate drivers also provides potential
targets for developing new anti-cancer drugs. By revealing the functional impact of candidate
drivers (e.g., a signature of DEGs), TCI results can be utilized to identify SGAs sharing similar
functional impact and to discover cancer pathways de novo or to map novel candidate drivers
to known pathways.
Interestingly, TCI revealed functional impact of certain SGAs with very high alteration fre-
quencies, such as TTN, CSMD3, MUC16, RYR2, LRP1B, and ZFHX4, whose roles in cancer
development remain controversial. There are studies indicating that their high mutation rates
are likely due to heterogeneous mutation rates at different chromosome locations [2, 16]. TCI
analysis provides a new perspective to examine the role of these genes: assessing whether
Fig 8. TCI predicts the SGA-FIs and their functional impact at the individual tumor level. A. A graph produced by TCI for
tumor TCGA-B1 -A657 that predicts major SGA-FIs and their regulated cancer processes. Blue nodes represent SGA-FIs and
red nodes (squares) represent oncogenic processes. An green directed link indicates that TCI predicts that the SGA-FI at the
tail of tha arrow regulates 10% or more of the DEGs in the cancer process at the head of the arrow. B. Same DEGs regulated by
distinct SGA-FIs in different tumors. DEGs in cancer processes shared between tumor TCGA-B1 -A657 and tumor TCGA-
HE-A5NL are shown as pie-char ts. Blue nodes denote SGA-FIs in tumor TCGA-B1-A6 57. Red nodes denote SGA-FIs in
tumor TCGA- HE-A5NL. Yellow nodes, (i.e., NEFH), are shared by both tumors. Each large node in the middle represents an
oncogeni c process. Within the circular nodes in the middl e of the figure, the number in the purple area denotes the number of
DEGs specific to TCGA-B1-A65 7. The number in the red area denotes the number of DEGs specific to TCGA- HE-A5NL . The
number in the yellow area denotes the number of DEGs shared by both tumors. An green directed link indicates an SGA-FI
regulates 10% or more DEGs in the cancer process.
https://do i.org/10.1371/j ournal.pc bi.1007088. g008
Tumor-sp ecific causal inferenc e
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1007088 July 5, 2019 19 / 29


===== PAGE 20 =====

perturbations (considering all SGA events) in these genes are supported as causally influencing
molecular and cellular phenotype changes. Instead of concentrating on assessing whether its
frequency is above random chance, TCI evaluates the functional impact of an altered gene that
determines whether it contributes to (drives) cancer development. Our results suggest that per-
turbing these genes, either by genome alterations, such as SM and/or SCNA, or by experimental
manipulations, has significant impact on molecular and cellular changes in both tumors and
cell lines. Therefore, these results motivate further investigation of an alternative hypothesis for
high overall alteration rates of these genes in cancer: perturbation of these genes leads in a vari-
ety of ways to functional changes that provide oncogenic advantages. The results suggest that
utilizing diverse types of SGA events in these genes is in fact a result of positive selection.
The TCI model can be extended in several ways. First, with its capability of integrating het-
erogeneous data types, TCI can be further extended to include additional SGA types (e.g.,
DNA methylation) and molecular phenotypes (e.g., protein expression and metabolomics
data) in order to provide a more comprehensive model of the causal relationships within
tumor cells. Such extensions can be readily achieved by representing such events in the SGA
data matrix, with minimum change in the TCI algorithm. Second, the functional impact of
each SGA (i.e., either activating or repressing the gene expression) should be further studied to
determine the SGA-FI as an oncogene or a tumor suppressor. Third, the TCI search algorithm
can be relaxed to allow synergistic interactions between SGAs in regulating a single DEG
which can be crucial to induce complex changes in gene expression pattern [69]. Last but not
the least, the recent emergence of single cell multi-omics sequencing technology has enabled
researchers to analyze gene mutations, copy number variants, methylations and gene expres-
sion changes simultaneously at the individual cell level [70–72]. When large, multi-omics,
tumor single-cell cohort datasets become available, they will provide us the opportunity to per-
form TCI on tumor multi-omics data at the single cell level and advance our understanding of
cell-to-cell variability and thus cancer progression.
Conclusion
This paper presented the TCI algorithm, which concentrates on addressing a fundamental ques-
tion in discovering cancer-driving genes: whether perturbation of a gene (considering different
types of perturbations) is causally responsible for certain molecular/cellular phenotypes (consid-
ering different phenotypic measurements) relevant to cancer development in a tumor. We com-
bined multiple heterogeneous genome data types and applied the TCI algorithm to 5,097
tumors across 16 cancer types from TCGA. TCI identified over 600 significant SGA-FIs, includ-
ing many known drivers, which were further supported by our computational analysis and
experimental evaluations. We illustrated that these SGA-FIs regulated expression changes of
genes involved in well-known oncogenic processes. We showed that two tumor samples with
very similar DEG expression profiles may nonetheless have significantly different SGA-FIs that
account for those profiles. Thus, TCI provides a new statistical framework for predicting causal
SGAs and understanding their functional impact on oncogenic processes of an individual
tumor. Finally, TCI is a special case of a general instance-based causal inference framework [73,
74] that can be broadly used to delineate causal relationships between genomic variance and
phenotype changes at the level of individuals which can be a single cell or an individual patient.
Materials and methods
SGA data collection and preprocessing
We obtained SM data for 16 cancer types directly from the TCGA portal (https://tcga-data.nci.
nih.gov/tcga/dataAccessMatri x.htm) (accessed in October 2014). We considered all the non-
Tumor-sp ecific causal inferenc e
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1007088 July 5, 2019 20 / 29


===== PAGE 21 =====

synonymous mutation events of all genes and considered the mutation events at the gene level,
where a mutated gene is defined as one that contains one or more non-synonymous mutations
or indels.
SCNA data were obtained from the Firehose browser of the Broad Institute (http://gdac.
broadinstitute.org/). TCGA network employed GISTIC 2.0[25] to process SCNA data, which
discretized the gene SCNA into 5 different levels: homozygous deletion, single copy deletion,
diploid normal copy, low copy number amplification, and high copy number amplification. We
only included genes with homozygous deletion or high copy number amplification for further
analysis. We further screened out the genes with inconsistent copy number alteration across
tumors in a given cancer type (i.e., gene was perturbed by both copy number amplification and
deletion events in the same cancer type and both types of events occurred > 25% of tumors).
We combined preprocessed SM data and SCNA data as SGA data, such that a gene in a
given tumor was designated as altered if it was affected by either an SM event and/or an SCNA
event.
DEG data collection and preprocessing
Gene expression data were preprocessed and obtained from the Firehose browser of the Broad
Institute. We used RNASeqV2 for cancer types with expression measurements in normal tis-
sues. For cancer types without RNASeqV2 measurements in normal cells (i.e., glioblastoma
multiforme and ovarian cancer), we used microarray data to identify DEGs. We determined
whether a gene is differentially expressed by comparing the gene expression in the tumor cell
against that in the corresponding tissue-specific normal cells. For a given cancer type, assum-
ing the expression of each gene (log 2 based) follows Gaussian distribution in normal cells, we
calculated the p values of each gene in a tumor, which estimated how significantly different the
gene expression in tumor was from that in normal cells. If the p value was equal or smaller
than 0.005 to either side, the gene was considered as differentially expressed in the correspond-
ing tumor. Furthermore, if a DEG was associated with the SCNA event affecting it, we
removed it from the DEG list of the tumor. We also removed tissue-specific DEGs if they were
highly correlated with cancer types or tissue origin (i.e., Pearson correlation coefficient larger
than 0.9). We thus identified the DEGs for each tumor and created a tumor-gene binary matrix
where 1 represents expression change, and 0 represents no expression change.
Tumor-specific model priors
Defining an informative prior that can represent the biological foundations of different genome
alterations in tumor cells can help us effectively correct model bias and thus make accurate pre-
dictions [30, 75]. Therefore, we need to specify the model prior P(A
h
!E
i
) for each SGA A
h
in
each tumor t by comparing its alteration frequency in the tumor cohort against normal cells. In
our paper, we used additional genomic information for both SM and SCNA to derive the prior
probability of each edge A
h
!E
i
using existing prior knowledge. We calculated and collected the
following SGA information for each gene h: (1) the MutSigCV p value for h among the tumors
in D from TCGA, and (2) the copy number amplification and deletion of h in a normal popula-
tion without cancer from 1000 genome project (http://www.internatio nalgenome.org/) [76, 77].
Such information can be applied to help account for mutation and copy number alterations
that are due to differences in gene lengths and chromosome locations which doesn’t depend on
SGA frequency.
For a tumor t and an arbitrary DEG E
i
, we defined the prior probability of A
h
being a parent
of E
i
using a multinomial distribution with a parameter vector θ = (θ
0
,θ
1
,θ
2
,. . .,θ
h
,. . .,θ
m
)
T
,
where
P
m
h¼0
y
h
¼ 1. Here, θ
0
is a user-defined parameter representing the prior belief that the
Tumor-sp ecific causal inferenc e
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1007088 July 5, 2019 21 / 29


===== PAGE 22 =====

non-SGA factor A
0
being the cause of E
i
, and θ
h
represents the prior probability of A
h
being
the cause of E
i
. In this study, we set θ
0
= 0.1. We assumed that θ
t
~Dir(θ
t
|μ
t
), where m
t
¼
ðm
0
; m
1
; . . . ; m
h
; . . . ; m
m
t
Þ
T
is a tumor-specific Dirichlet parameter vector governing the distri-
bution of θ
t
. For a tumor t, we calculated the prior probability θ
h
as follows:
y
h
¼ 1   y
0
ð Þ
m
h
P
m
h
0
¼1
m
0
h
ð3Þ
where h’ indexes over the m variables in SGA_SET
t
; p
h
is MutSigCV p value for A
h
and μ
h
= 1
−p
h
is a Dirichlet parameter.
We also analyzed three different ways of calculating θ
h
. First, as a simple default, we assume
there are no informative priors. We distribute the residual probability mass evenly for all SGAs
in tumor t as y
h
¼ 1   y
0
ð Þ
1
m
. Second, we infer informative priors by incorporating SGA fre-
quency as y
h
¼ 1   y
0
ð Þ
f
h
P
m
h
0
¼1
f
0
h
, where f
h
is the alteration frequency of SGA h. The idea is that
the driver genes should be positively selected to drive cancer progression, and therefore more
likely are enriched in the tumor population. Third, we consider both SGA frequency and num-
ber of SGAs in each tumor so that the prior is calculated as y
h
¼ 1   y
0
ð Þ
w
h
P
m
h
0
¼1
w
0
h
, where
w
h
¼
P
t 2U
h
1
m
t
, m
t
is the number of SGAs in tumor t and U
h
denotes the tumor set in which
SGA h has a genome alteration.
Different ways of calculating priors correspond to different biological assumptions, and
thus, have distinct values, as shown in S7 Table. However, as illustrated in S8 and S9 Tables, a
significant portion of the SGA regulators for DEGs and SGA-FIs called in each tumor remain
the same for different priors. Thus, the strength of statistical relationships between SGAs and
their target DEGs, as influenced by the marginal likelihood term P(D|A
h
!E
i
), are sufficiently
high to overcome the differences in prior probabilities of some SGAs being regulators of DEGs
even if the priors are calculated differently.
Sensitivity analysis of A0 prior effect
We performed sensitivity analysis to examine the effect of the A0 prior. We used TCI to pre-
dict the SGA regulators for DEGs in each tumor using different A0 priors, i.e., 0.001, 0.005,
0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5. We compared the top SGA changes for DEGs in each tumor.
As shown in S4 Fig, the top SGA changes are not significant, i.e. <0.08%, even though there is
a 500-fold change for the A0 priors. We found TDI results are quite stable when the A0 prior
is in the range of 0.05 to 0.3. We then set 0.1 as the prior probability for A0.
Identification of SGA-FIs
Causal edges from different SGAs have different posterior probabilities, as expected. To stan-
dardize how to interpret the significance of a posterior probability for a causal edge P
e
, we
designed a statistical test based random permutation experiments. We generated a series of
permuted datasets using the TCGA data, in which the DEG values were permuted among the
tumors of a common tissue of origin, while the SGA status in each tumor remained as reported
by TCGA. This permutation operation disrupts the statistical relationships between SGAs and
DEGs while retaining the tissue-specific patterns of SGAs and DEGs. We applied TCI algo-
rithm to permuted data to calculate posterior probabilities of edges emitting from each SGA in
random data. We then determined the probability that an edge from an SGA could be assigned
with a given P
e
or higher in data from permutation experiments (i.e., the p value to the edge
with a given P
e
).
Tumor-sp ecific causal inferenc e
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1007088 July 5, 2019 22 / 29


===== PAGE 23 =====

The p value in this setting is also the expected rate of false discovery of an SGA as the cause
of a DEG by random chance. We utilize this property to control the false discovery rate when
identifying SGA-FIs in a tumor. We designated an SGA event in a tumor as an SGA-FI if it has
5 or more causal edges to DEGs that are each assigned a p-value < 0.05. The overall false dis-
covery rate of the joint causal relationships between an SGA to 5 or more target DEGs is
smaller than 10
−7
. The S1 Fig shows that at this threshold, none of SGA was assigned as
SGA-FI by random chance.
Cell culture and siRNA transfection
HGC27 (Sigma-Aldrich) and PC-3 (ATCC) cells were cultured according to the manufactur-
er’s recommendations . The non-targeting and the CSMD3 and ZFHX4 siRNAs were obtained
from OriGene (Rockville, MD). The siRNA sequences are as follow: si-CSMD3-1, GGUAUA
UUACGAAGAAUUGCAGAGT ; si-CSMD3-2, ACAAAUGGAGGAA UACUAACAACAG;
si-ZFHX4-1, CGAUGCUUCAGAAA CAAAGGAAGAC; si-ZFHX4-2, GGAACGACAGAG A
AAUAAAGAUUCA. The siRNAs were transfected into cells using DharmaFECT transfection
reagents for 48 hrs according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Cell proliferation and viability assays
Cell proliferation/viability was assayed by CCK-8 assay (Dojindo Laboratories, Kumamoto,
Japan). Briefly, HGC27 and PC3 cells were plated at a density of 3 x 10
3
cells/well in 96-well
plates. After siRNA transfection for 3 or 6 days, CCK-8 solution containing a highly water-sol-
uble tetrazolium salt WST-8 [2-(2-methoxy-4-nitroph enyl)-3-(4-nitrophenyl)-5-(2,4-dis ulfo-
phenyl)-2H-tetrazolium, monosodium salt] was added to cells in each well, followed by
incubation for 1–4 h. Cell viability was determined by measuring the O.D. at 450 nm. Percent
over control was calculated as a measure of cell viability.
Transwell migration assay
Cell migration was measured using 24-well transwell chambers with 8 μm pore polycarbonate
membranes (Corning, Corning, NY). SiRNA-transfected cells were seeded at a density of 7.5 x
10
4
cells/ml to the upper chamber of the transwell chambers in 0.5 ml growth media with 0.1%
FBS. The lower chamber contained 0.9 ml of growth medium with 20% FBS as chemoattrac-
tant media. After 20 hrs of culture, the cells in the upper chamber that did not migrate were
gently wiped away with a cotton swab, the cells that had moved to the lower surface of the
membrane were stained with crystal violet and counted from five random fields under a light
microscope.
Apoptotic assay
Apoptosis was assessed by flow cytometry analysis of annexin V and propidium iodide (PI)
double stained cells using Vybrant Apoptosis Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Carlsbad,
CA). Briefly, the cells after washing with PBS were incubated in annexin V/PI labeling solution
at room temperature for 10 min, then analyzed in the BD FACSCalibur flow cytometer (Bec-
ton, Dickinson and Company, Franklin Lakes, NJ).
Supporting information
S1 Text. Supporting information containing a detailed description of tumor-specific
causal inference model.
(DOCX)
Tumor-sp ecific causal inferenc e
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1007088 July 5, 2019 23 / 29


===== PAGE 24 =====

S1 Table. Number of tumors per cancer type collected from TCGA.
(XLSX)
S2 Table. S2.1. TCI predicted 634 Candidate SGA-Fis and their target DEGs; S2.2. Cancer
type distribution of 634 Candidate SGA-FIs.
(XLSX)
S3 Table. SGA-FIs that are commonly altered by both SM and SCNA.
(XLSX)
S4 Table. Number of target L1000 genes for 8 most frequent SGA-FIs that are differentially
expressed in different tissue types.
(XLSX)
S5 Table. Percentage of genes involved in the cancer Hallmark processes regulated by
SGA-FIs.
(XLSX)
S6 Table. SGA-FI pairs sharing common target genes.
(XLSX)
S7 Table. Euclidean distance of log10 fold changes between different ways of calculating
priors.
(XLSX)
S8 Table. Overlap ratio of top SGA regulator for DEGs in each tumor between different
ways of calculating priors.
(XLSX)
S9 Table. Overlap ratio of SGA-FI calls in each tumor between different ways of calculat-
ing priors.
(XLSX)
S1 Fig. Controlling false discovery. A. The plot shows the relationship of total number of
SGAs being designated as SGA-FIs with respect to the threshold of calling an SGA-FI in ran-
dom and real data. The x-axis shows the different thresholds, i.e., the number of DEGs pre-
dicted to be regulated by an SGA-FI, and the y-axis shows the number of significant SGA-FIs
across all tumors. B. The plot shows the relationship of average number of SGAs being desig-
nated as SGA-FIs in a tumor with respect to the threshold of calling an SGA-FI in random and
real data. The x-axis shows the different thresholds, i.e., the number of DEGs predicted to be
regulated by an SGA-FI, and the y-axis shows the average number of significant SGA-FIs in a
single tumor.
(TIF)
S2 Fig. Comparison of causal analysis results from real data and random data. A. Compari-
son of distributions of the posterior probabilities of the highest candidate causal edges point
from 3 most frequent SGAs to DEGs. B. Examples of 3 genes with high SGA frequency but
without any high posterior probability causal edges emitting from them. C. Comparison of
number of tumors called as SGA-FIs from the real dataset, randomly permutated DEG dataset
and single SGA permutated dataset for the 6 most frequency SGAs.
(TIF)
S3 Fig. Networks of SGA-FIs share significant overlapping DEGs. A. SGA-FIs interacting
network containing 536 SGA-FIs and 2669 edges. Blue nodes represent known cancer drivers
Tumor-sp ecific causal inferenc e
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1007088 July 5, 2019 24 / 29


===== PAGE 25 =====

and red nodes represent novel SGA-FIs. Node size indicates the number of its affected DEGs
and edge width indicates the number of overlapped DEGs between two nodes. B-E. Top 15
SGA-FIs that share the most significant overlapping target DEGs with CDKN2A, PTEN,
LRP1B, and MUC16. An edge between a pair of SGA-FI indicates that they share significantly
overlapping target DEG sets, and the thickness of the line is proportional to negative log of the
p-values of overlapping target DEG sets.
(TIF)
S4 Fig. Top SGA change rate with respect to different A0 priors.
(TIF)
Acknowledgmen ts
The authors acknowledge editorial assistance provided by Michelle Kienholz and technical
assistance by Fan Yu and Soumya Luthra. The authors would like to thank Drs. Clark Gly-
mour, Peter Spirtes, and Josh Stuart for discussions and suggestions.
Author Contributions
Conceptualization: Gregory F. Cooper, Adrian V. Lee, Xinghua Lu.
Data curation: Chunhui Cai, Kevin N. Lu, Xiaojun Ma, Xueer Chen, Yifan Xue, Vicky Chen,
Lujia Chen, Liyue Yu, Harry S. Hochheiser.
Formal analysis: Chunhui Cai, Kevin N. Lu, Xueer Chen, Yifan Xue, Vicky Chen, Lujia Chen,
Liyue Yu, Q. Jane Wang, Xinghua Lu.
Funding acquisition: Gregory F. Cooper, Xinghua Lu.
Investigation: Chunhui Cai, Gregory F. Cooper, Adrian V. Lee, Nathan Clark, Songjian Lu,
Q. Jane Wang, Xinghua Lu.
Methodology: Chunhui Cai, Gregory F. Cooper, Songjian Lu, Xia Jiang, Xinghua Lu.
Project administration: Xinghua Lu.
Software: Chunhui Cai, Kevin N. Lu, Xiaojun Ma, Xueer Chen, Liyue Yu.
Supervision: Xinghua Lu.
Validation: Shuping Xu, Zhenlong Zhao, Q. Jane Wang.
Visualization: Q. Jane Wang.
Writing – original draft: Q. Jane Wang, Xinghua Lu.
Writing – review & editing: Xinghua Lu.
References
1. Kandoth C, McLellan MD, Vandin F, Ye K, Niu B, Lu C, et al. Mutationa l landscape and significance
across 12 major cancer types. Nature. 2013; 502(7471) :333–9. https://doi.or g/10.1038/n ature12634
PMID: 241322 90; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC392736 8.
2. Lawrence MS, Stojan ov P, Mermel CH, Robinson JT, Garraway LA, Golub TR, et al. Discovery and sat-
uration analysis of cancer genes across 21 tumour types. Nature. 2014; 505(7484) :495–501 . https://
doi.org/10.10 38/nature129 12 PMID: 243903 50; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC404896 2.
3. Ciriello G, Miller ML, Aksoy BA, Senbabaogl u Y, Schultz N, Sander C. Emergin g landscape of onco-
genic signatur es across human cancers. Nat Genet. 2013; 45(10):112 7–33. https://doi.or g/10.1038/ ng.
2762 PMID: 240718 51; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC432004 6.
Tumor-sp ecific causal inferenc e
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1007088 July 5, 2019 25 / 29


===== PAGE 26 =====

4. Zack TI, Schumac her SE, Carter SL, Chernia ck AD, Saksena G, Tabak B, et al. Pan-cancer patterns of
somatic copy number alteration. Nat Genet. 2013; 45(10):113 4–40. https:/ /doi.org/10.10 38/ng.27 60
PMID: 240718 52; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC396698 3.
5. Stransky N, Cerami E, Schalm S, Kim JL, Lengau er C. The landscape of kinase fusions in cancer. Nat
Commun . 2014; 5:4846. https://doi.or g/10.1038/ ncomms5846 PMID: 25204415; PubMed Central
PMCID: PMC417559 0.
6. Li Y, Schwab C, Ryan SL, Papaemma nuil E, Robinson HM, Jacobs P, et al. Constitutiona l and somatic
rearrange ment of chromosome 21 in acute lymphobla stic leukaemia . Nature. 2014; 508(7494) :98–102.
https://doi.or g/10.103 8/nature1311 5 PMID: 24670643; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC397627 2.
7. Maher CA, Wilson RK. Chromoth ripsis and human disease: piecing together the shattering process.
Cell. 2012; 148(1–2):2 9–32. https://do i.org/10.1016 /j.cell.201 2.01.006 PMID: 22265399; PubMed Cen-
tral PMCID: PMC365812 3.
8. Dawson MA, Kouzarides T. Cancer epigenetic s: from mechanism to therapy. Cell. 2012; 150(1):12– 27.
https://doi.or g/10.101 6/j.cell.20 12.06.013 PMID: 227702 12.
9. Feinberg AP, Koldob skiy MA, Gondor A. Epigenetic modulato rs, modifier s and mediators in cancer aeti-
ology and progres sion. Nat Rev Genet. 2016; 17(5):284– 99. https://doi.or g/10.1038/ nrg.2016.13 PMID:
26972587; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC4 888057.
10. Jones PA, Baylin SB. The fundamen tal role of epigenet ic events in cancer. Nature reviews Genetic s.
2002; 3(6):415–2 8. https://doi.or g/10.1038/n rg816 PMID: 12042769.
11. Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. Hallma rks of cancer: the next generation. Cell. 2011; 144(5):646 –74. https://
doi.org/10.10 16/j.cell.2011. 02.013 PMID: 2137623 0.
12. Rubio-Perez C, Tambore ro D, Schroeder MP, Antolin AA, Deu-Po ns J, Perez-Llamas C, et al. In silico
prescript ion of anticancer drugs to cohorts of 28 tumor types reveals targeting opportunit ies. Cancer
Cell. 2015; 27(3):382– 96. https://doi. org/10.1016/j .ccell.2015.0 2.007 PMID: 25759023.
13. Biankin AV, Piantados i S, Hollingsworth SJ. Patient-centri c trials for therapeutic develop ment in preci-
sion oncolog y. Nature. 2015; 526(757 3):361–70. https://doi.or g/10.103 8/nature1581 9 PMID:
26469047.
14. Garraway LA, Verweij J, Ballman KV. Precision oncolog y: an overview. J Clin Oncol. 2013; 31
(15):1803– 5. https://do i.org/10.1200 /JCO.2013.4 9.4799 PMID: 23589545.
15. Dees ND, Zhang Q, Kandoth C, Wendl MC, Schierding W, Koboldt DC, et al. MuSiC: identifying muta-
tional significance in cancer genomes. Genom e Res. 2012; 22(8):1589 –98. https://d oi.org/10.110 1/gr.
134635.111 PMID: 22759861; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC340927 2.
16. Lawrence MS, Stojan ov P, Polak P, Kryukov GV, Cibulskis K, Sivachenko A, et al. Mutationa l heteroge-
neity in cancer and the search for new cancer-as sociated genes. Nature. 2013; 499(7457) :214–8.
https://doi.or g/10.103 8/nature1221 3 PMID: 23770567; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC391950 9.
17. Djotsa Nono ABD, Chen K, Liu X. Comutat ional prediction of genetic drivers in cancer. eLS 2016.
https://doi.or g/10.100 2/9780470015 902.a00 25331
18. Adzhube i I, Jordan DM, Sunyae v SR. Predicting functional effect of human missense mutations using
PolyPhen-2 . Curr Protoc Hum Genet. 2013;Chap ter 7:Unit7 20. https://do i.org/10.1002 /047114 2905.
hg0720s 76 PMID: 23315928; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC44 80630.
19. Carter H, Chen S, Isik L, Tyekuchev a S, Velculescu VE, Kinzler KW, et al. Cance r-specific high-
throughput annotati on of somatic mutations : computation al prediction of driver missense mutations.
Cancer Res. 2009; 69(16):666 0–7. https://doi.or g/10.1158/ 0008-5472.CAN -09-1133 PMID: 19654296 ;
PubMed Central PMCID: PMC276341 0.
20. Reva B, Antipin Y, Sander C. Predicting the functional impact of protein mutations: applicati on to cancer
genomics. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011; 39(17):e11 8. https://doi.or g/10.109 3/nar/gkr407 PMID: 21727090;
PubMed Central PMCID: PMC317718 6.
21. Gonzalez -Perez A, Lopez-Bigas N. Functiona l impact bias reveals cancer drivers. Nucleic Acids Res.
2012; 40(21):e16 9. https://doi.or g/10.1093/n ar/gks743 PMID: 22904074; PubMed Central PMCID:
PMC350597 9.
22. Niu B, Scott AD, Sengupta S, Bailey MH, Batra P, Ning J, et al. Protein-stru cture-guided discovery of
functional mutations across 19 cancer types. Nat Genet . 2016; 48(8):827– 37. https://doi. org/10.1038/
ng.3586 PMID: 27294619; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC531557 6.
23. Bashasha ti A, Haffari G, Ding J, Ha G, Lui K, Rosner J, et al. DriverNet: uncoverin g the impact of
somatic driver mutations on transcriptional networks in cancer. Genom e Biol. 2012; 13(12):R 124.
https://doi.or g/10.118 6/gb-2012- 13-12-r12 4 PMID: 23383675; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC4056 374.
24. Zack TI, Schumac her SE, Carter SL, Chernia ck AD, Saksena G, Tabak B, et al. Pan-cancer patterns of
somatic copy number alteration. Nat Genet. 2013; 45(10):113 4–40. https:/ /doi.org/10.10 38/ng.27 60
PMID: 240718 52; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC396698 3.
Tumor-sp ecific causal inferenc e
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1007088 July 5, 2019 26 / 29


===== PAGE 27 =====

25. Mermel CH, Schumacher SE, Hill B, Meyerson ML, Berouk him R, Getz G. GISTIC2.0 facilitates sensi-
tive and confident localizatio n of the targets of focal somatic copy-numbe r alteration in human cancers.
Genome Biol. 2011; 12(4):R41. https:// doi.org/10.11 86/gb-2011- 12-4-r41 PMID: 21527027; PubMed
Central PMCID: PMC3 218867.
26. Razi A, Banerjee N, Dimitrova N, Varadan V. Non-linear Bayesian framework to determin e the tran-
scriptiona l effects of cancer-a ssociated genomic aberration s. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2015;
2015:6514– 8. Epub 2016/01/07. https:/ /doi.org/10.11 09/EMB C.2015.731 9885 PMID: 267377 85;
PubMed Central PMCID: PMC534114 9.
27. Yang H, Wei Q, Zhong X, Yang H, Li B. Cancer driver gene discovery throug h an integrative genomics
approach in a non-param etric Bayesian framework. Bioinform atics. 2017; 33(4):483– 90. Epub 2016/11 /
01. https://doi. org/10.1093/b ioinform atics/btw66 2 PMID: 27797769; PubMed Central PMCID:
PMC607520 1.
28. Wang Z, Ng KS, Chen T, Kim TB, Wang F, Shaw K, et al. Cancer driver mutation predicti on through
Bayesian integration of multi-omic data. PLoS One. 2018; 13(5):e019 6939. Epub 2018/05 /09. https://
doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p one.0196939 PMID: 29738578; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC594021 9.
29. Pearl J. Causality : Models, Reasoning and Inference . 2nd ed: Cambridge University Press; 2009.
30. Glymour C, Cooper G. Computation, Causat ion, and Discovery . Cambridge , MA: MIT Press; 1999.
31. Visweswa ran S, Angus DC, Hsieh M, Weissfeld L, Yealy D, Cooper GF. Learning patient-s pecific pre-
dictive models from clinical data. J Biomed Inform. 2010; 43(5):669– 85. https://doi. org/10.1016/j .jbi.
2010.04. 009 PMID: 20450985; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC293 3959.
32. Cooper G, Cai C, Lu X. Tumor-sp ecific Causal Inference (TCI): A Bayesian Method for Identifying Caus-
ative Genom e Alterations within Individua l Tumors. bioRxiv. 2017.
33. Nica AC, Dermitzakis ET. Expressio n quantitativ e trait loci: present and future. Philos Trans R Soc
Lond B Biol Sci. 2013; 368(162 0):20120362 . Epub 2013/05/ 08. https://doi.or g/10.109 8/rstb.2012. 0362
PMID: 236506 36; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC368272 7.
34. Battle A, Montgom ery SB. Determinin g causality and consequen ce of expression quantitativ e trait loci.
Hum Genet. 2014; 133(6):727 –35. Epub 2014/04/2 9. https://doi.or g/10.1007/ s00439-014- 1446-0
PMID: 247708 75; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC407761 4.
35. Mermer T, Terek MC, Zeybek B, Ergenoglu AM, Yeniel AO, Ozsaran A, et al. Thrombopo ietin: a novel
candida te tumor marker for the diagnosis of ovarian cancer. J Gynecol Oncol. 2012; 23(2):86–9 0. Epub
2012/04/ 24. https://doi.or g/10.380 2/jgo.2012.23.2 .86 PMID: 22523623; PubMed Central PMCID:
PMC332535 4.
36. Naina HV, Harris S. Paraneopl astic thrombocytos is in ovarian cancer. N Engl J Med. 2012; 366
(19):1840; author reply Epub 2012/05 /11. https://doi. org/10.1056/N EJMc120309 5 PMID: 225712 10.
37. Meraz IM, Savage DJ, Segura-Ib arra V, Li J, Rhudy J, Gu J, et al. Adjuvant cationic liposomes present-
ing MPL and IL-12 induce cell death, suppress tumor growth, and alter the cellular phenotyp e of tumors
in a murine model of breast cancer. Mol Pharm. 2014; 11(10):348 4–91. Epub 2014/09/03. https:// doi.
org/10.1021/ mp5002697 PMID: 25179345; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC418667 9.
38. Pulikkan JA, Madera D, Xue L, Bradley P, Landre tte SF, Kuo YH, et al. Thrombo poietin/MPL partici-
pates in initiating and maintaining RUNX1- ETO acute myeloid leukemia via PI3K/AKT signaling. Blood.
2012; 120(4):868 –79. Epub 2012/05/23. https:// doi.org/10.11 82/blood-20 12-03-414 649 PMID:
22613795; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3 412349.
39. Ciriello G, Cerami E, Sander C, Schultz N. Mutual exclusivity analysis identifies oncogen ic network
modules. Genome resear ch. 2012; 22(2):398– 406. Epub 2011/09/13. https://doi.or g/10.1101/ gr.
125567.111 PMID: 21908773; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC326604 6.
40. Lu S, Lu KN, Cheng SY, Hu B, Ma X, Nystrom N, et al. Identifying Driver Genomic Alterat ions in Can-
cers by Searching Minimum -Weight, Mutually Exclusive Sets. PLoS Comput Biol. 2015; 11(8):
e1004257. https:// doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.10042 57 PMID: 26317392; PubMed Central PMCID:
PMC455284 3.
41. Vandin F, Upfal E, Raphael BJ. De novo discovery of mutated driver pathways in cancer. Genome Res.
2012; 22(2):375– 85. https://doi.or g/10.1101/ gr.120477.11 1 PMID: 216532 52; PubMed Central PMCID:
PMC326604 4.
42. Shabalin AA. Matrix eQTL: ultra fast eQTL analysis via large matrix operations. Bioinform atics. 2012;
28(10):135 3–8. Epub 2012/04 /12. https://doi.or g/10.109 3/bioinform atics/bts163 PMID: 224926 48;
PubMed Central PMCID: PMC334856 4.
43. Montes M, Nielsen MM, Maglieri G, Jacobsen A, Hojfeldt J, Agrawa l-Singh S, et al. The lncRNA
MIR31HG regulates p16(INK4 A) expression to modulate senesc ence. Nat Commun . 2015; 6:6967.
https://doi.or g/10.103 8/ncomms 7967 PMID: 25908244 .
Tumor-sp ecific causal inferenc e
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1007088 July 5, 2019 27 / 29


===== PAGE 28 =====

44. Shih JW, Chiang WF, Wu ATH, Wu MH, Wang LY, Yu YL, et al. Long noncoding RNA LncHIFCA R/
MIR31HG is a HIF-1alph a co-activator driving oral cancer progression. Nat Commun . 2017; 8:15874 .
https://doi.or g/10.103 8/ncomms 15874 PMID: 2863961 9; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC548968 8.
45. Kumar B, Khaleghz adegan S, Mears B, Hatano K, Kudrolli TA, Chowdhury WH, et al. Identification of
miR-30b- 3p and miR-30d- 5p as direct regulat ors of androgen receptor signalin g in prostate cancer by
complement ary functional microRNA library screening . Oncotarget . 2016; 7(45):7259 3–607. https:// doi.
org/10.18632 /oncotarg et.12241 PMID: 27683042; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC5 341930.
46. Tseng YY, Moriarity BS, Gong W, Akiyama R, Tiwari A, Kawakam i H, et al. PVT1 dependenc e in cancer
with MYC copy-numbe r increase. Nature. 2014; 512(7512) :82–6. https://doi.or g/10.103 8/nature1331 1
PMID: 250430 44; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC476714 9.
47. Hofree M, Shen JP, Carter H, Gross A, Ideker T. Network-ba sed stratificatio n of tumor mutations.
Nature methods. 2013; 10(11):110 8–15. https://doi.or g/10.1038/ nmeth.265 1 PMID: 24037242;
PubMed Central PMCID: PMC386608 1.
48. Chudnovs ky Y, Kim D, Zheng S, Whyte WA, Bansal M, Bray MA, et al. ZFHX4 interacts with the NuRD
core member CHD4 and regulates the glioblastom a tumor-initiatin g cell state. Cell reports. 2014; 6
(2):313–24 . https://doi. org/10.1016/j .celrep.2 013.12.032 PMID: 24440720; PubMed Central PMCID:
PMC404139 0.
49. Liu CX, Li Y, Obermoelle r-McCormic k LM, Schwartz AL, Bu G. The putative tumor suppressor LRP1B,
a novel member of the low density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor family, exhibits both overlapping and dis-
tinct properties with the LDL receptor -related protein. J Biol Chem. 2001; 276(31):28 889–96. https://doi.
org/10.1074/ jbc.M10272 7200 PMID: 1138497 8.
50. Hart JR, Zhang Y, Liao L, Ueno L, Du L, Jonkers M, et al. The butterfly effect in cancer: a single base
mutation can remode l the cell. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015; 112(4):113 1–6. https://doi.or g/10.1073/
pnas.142 4012112 PMID: 255834 73; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC431383 5.
51. Weinberg RA. The Biology of Cancer. 2nd ed: Garland Science; 2013.
52. Thomas-C hollier M, Hufton A, Heinig M, O’Keeffe S, Masri NE, Roider HG, et al. Transcript ion factor
binding predictions using TRAP for the analysis of ChIP-seq data and regulatory SNPs. Nat Protoc.
2011; 6(12):1860 –9. https://doi.or g/10.1038/ nprot.2011.40 9 PMID: 220517 99.
53. Lustgarte n JL, Balasub ramanian JB, Viswes waran S, Gopalak rishnan V. Learning Parsimoniou s Clas-
sification Rules from Gene Expressio n Data Using Bayesian Networks with Local Structure. Data
(Basel). 2017; 2(1). https://doi. org/10.3390/d ata2010 005 PMID: 28331847; PubMed Central PMCID:
PMC535867 0.
54. Meissl K, Macho-Mas chler S, Muller M, Strobl B. The good and the bad faces of STAT1 in solid
tumours. Cytokine . 2017; 89:12–20. Epub 2015/12/04. https:// doi.org/10.10 16/j.cyto.20 15.11.011
PMID: 266319 12.
55. Lin J, Myers AL, Wang Z, Nancarro w DJ, Ferrer-Tor res D, Handlogte n A, et al. Osteopontin (OPN/
SPP1) isoforms collectively enhance tumor cell invasion and dissem ination in esophageal adenoca rci-
noma. Oncotarget. 2015; 6(26):2223 9–57. Epub 2015/06/ 13. https://doi.or g/10.186 32/oncotarget .4161
PMID: 260689 49; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC467316 0.
56. De Marco P, Rome o E, Vivacqua A, Malagua rnera R, Abona nte S, Romeo F, et al. GPER1 is regulated
by insulin in cancer cells and cancer-as sociated fibroblasts . Endocr Relat Cancer. 2014; 21(5):739– 53.
Epub 2014/07/ 12. https://doi.or g/10.153 0/ERC-14- 0245 PMID: 25012984.
57. Magge D, Guo ZS, O’Malley ME, Francis L, Ravindran athan R, Bartlett DL. Inhibitors of C5 complement
enhance vaccinia virus oncolysis . Cancer Gene Ther. 2013; 20(6):342– 50. Epub 2013/05 /11. https://
doi.org/10.10 38/cgt.2013 .26 PMID: 23661042; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC406083 0.
58. Willert K, Nusse R. Beta-ca tenin: a key mediator of Wnt signaling. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 1998; 8(1):95–
102. Epub 1998/04 /08. PMID: 952961 2.
59. Dyson NJ. RB1: a prototype tumor suppressor and an enigma. Genes Dev. 2016; 30(13):149 2–502.
Epub 2016/07/ 13. https://doi.or g/10.110 1/gad.282145.1 16 PMID: 27401552; PubMed Central PMCID:
PMC494932 2.
60. Bykov VJN, Eriksson SE, Bianchi J, Wiman KG. Targeti ng mutant p53 for efficient cancer therapy. Nat
Rev Cancer. 2018; 18(2):89–1 02. Epub 2017/12/16. https:// doi.org/10.10 38/nrc.20 17.109 PMID:
29242642.
61. Aubrey BJ, Kelly GL, Janic A, Herold MJ, Strasser A. How does p53 induce apoptosis and how does
this relate to p53-mediated tumour suppressio n? Cell Death Differ. 2018; 25(1):104– 13. Epub 2017/11/
18. https://doi. org/10.1038/c dd.2017.169 PMID: 291491 01; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC572952 9.
62. Kumar S, Park SH, Cieply B, Schupp J, Killiam E, Zhang F, et al. A pathway for the control of anoikis
sensitivity by E-cadherin and epithelial-to -mesenchy mal transitio n. Mol Cell Biol. 2011; 31(19):403 6–
51. https://doi. org/10.1128/M CB.01342 -10 PMID: 21746881; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC318735 2.
Tumor-sp ecific causal inferenc e
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1007088 July 5, 2019 28 / 29


===== PAGE 29 =====

63. Carraced o A, Pandolfi PP. The PTEN-P I3K pathway: of feedbacks and cross-talks. Oncogene. 2008;
27(41):552 7–41. https:// doi.org/10.10 38/onc.20 08.247 PMID: 18794886.
64. Cully M, You H, Levine AJ, Mak TW. Beyond PTEN mutations: the PI3K pathway as an integrator of
multiple inputs during tumorige nesis. Nat Rev Cancer. 2006; 6(3):184–9 2. https://doi.or g/10.1038/
nrc1819 PMID: 16453012.
65. Saal LH, Holm K, Maurer M, Memeo L, Su T, Wang X, et al. PIK3CA mutations correlate with hormon e
receptors , node metastas is, and ERBB2 , and are mutually exclusive with PTEN loss in human breast
carcinoma. Cancer Res. 2005; 65(7):2554 –9. Epub 2005/04/05. https://doi.or g/10.1158/ 0008-5472-
CAN-04-3 913 PMID: 158052 48.
66. Kim JA, Tan Y, Wang X, Cao X, Veerarag havan J, Liang Y, et al. Comp rehensive functional analysis of
the tousled- like kinase 2 frequently amplified in aggressive luminal breast cancers. Nat Commun. 2016;
7:12991. Epub 2016/10/04. https://d oi.org/10.103 8/ncomm s12991 PMID: 27694828; PubMed Central
PMCID: PMC506401 5.
67. Han C, Yang L, Choi HH, Baddo ur J, Achreja A, Liu Y, et al. Amplificati on of USP13 drives ovarian can-
cer metabolism . Nat Commun. 2016; 7:13525. Epub 2016/11 /29. https://doi.or g/10.103 8/
ncomms1 3525 PMID: 278924 57; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC513370 6.
68. Mukaida N, Wang YY, Li YY. Roles of Pim-3, a novel survival kinase, in tumorige nesis. Cancer Sci.
2011; 102(8):143 7–42. Epub 2011/04/27. https:// doi.org/10.11 11/j.134 9-7006.2011 .01966.x PMID:
21518143.
69. McMurray HR, Sampson ER, Compite llo G, Kinsey C, Newman L, Smith B, et al. Synerg istic response
to oncogen ic mutations defines gene class critical to cancer phenotyp e. Nature. 2008; 453
(7198):111 2–6. Epub 2008/05 /27. https://doi.or g/10.103 8/nature0697 3 PMID: 18500333; PubMed
Central PMCID: PMC2 613942.
70. Han KY, Kim KT, Joung JG, Son DS, Kim YJ, Jo A, et al. SIDR: simultaneo us isolation and parallel
sequencin g of genomic DNA and total RNA from single cells. Genom e Res. 2018; 28(1):75–8 7. Epub
2017/12/ 07. https://doi.or g/10.110 1/gr.223263.1 17 PMID: 292086 29; PubMed Central PMCID:
PMC574918 4.
71. Bian S, Hou Y, Zhou X, Li X, Yong J, Wang Y, et al. Single-cell multiomic s sequencin g and analyses of
human colorectal cancer. Science. 2018; 362(6418) :1060–3 . Epub 2018/12/01. https:/ /doi.org/10.11 26/
science.aao3 791 PMID: 30498128.
72. Macaulay IC, Ponting CP, Voet T. Single-C ell Multiomics: Multiple Measuremen ts from Single Cells.
Trends Genet. 2017; 33(2):155– 68. Epub 2017/01 /17. https://doi.or g/10.101 6/j.tig.201 6.12.003 PMID:
28089370; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC5 303816.
73. Visweswa ran S, Angus D, Hsieh M, Weiss feld L, Yealy D, Cooper G. Learning patient-s pecific predic-
tive models from clinical data. Journal of biomedi cal informati cs. 2010; 43:669–85. https://d oi.org/10.
1016/j.jbi.20 10.04.009 PMID: 204509 85
74. Visweswa ran S, Cooper GF. Patient-specif ic models for predicting the outcomes of patients with com-
munity acquired pneumon ia. AMIA Annual Symposium proceed ings / AMIA Symposium AMIA Sympo-
sium. 2005:759–63 . PMID: 16779142; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC156 0580.
75. Heckerm an D, Geiger D, Chickering DM. Learning bayesian networks: The combinatio n of knowledge
and statistic al data. Machine learning. 1995; 20(3):197– 243.
76. Mills RE, Walter K, Stewart C, Handsake r RE, Chen K, Alkan C, et al. Mapping copy number variation
by popula tion-scale genome sequencin g. Nature. 2011; 470(7332) :59–65. https://doi.or g/10.1038/
nature09708 PMID: 21293372; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC307705 0.
77. Sudman t PH, Rausch T, Gardner EJ, Handsak er RE, Abyzov A, Huddleston J, et al. An integrated map
of structural variation in 2,504 human genomes. Nature. 2015; 526(7571) :75–81. https://doi.or g/10.
1038/nat ure15394 PMID: 26432246; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC461 7611.
Tumor-sp ecific causal inferenc e
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1007088 July 5, 2019 29 / 29